I'm Wesley Morris and this is
Cannonball. Today, what do these [music]
three albums have in common? Double
fantasy life
together
>> in uterro. [music]
>> Back to black.
>> They tried to make me go to rehab. I
said [music] no.
>> In the weeks since D'Angelo died, I've
been doing what people do when they hear
that an artist has died. I listened to
his music. He has three superb,
differently superb albums. Brown Sugar
from 1995.
[music]
>> Voodoo, which came out in 2000.
This is the one that's considered the
masterpiece. It's the one that's
synonymous with what the popular
imagination has basically reduced this
man to a six-pack. We all know the
video. [music]
>> It's nothing but a camera inching closer
and closer to him and his abs as he
sings to us naked. But for me, the album
that I keep coming back to is the last
one, the one that came out in 2014, 14
years after Voodoo, Black Messiah.
>> For one thing, Black Messiah struck me
as being a perfect final album. What do
I mean by that? I mean that it sounds as
if existential questions are being posed
and emotional quandries are being
if not resolved then at least
confronted. The man singing it died at
51 [music] of pancreatic cancer and the
time I've been spending with Black
Messiah got me thinking about other
artists last albums and whether or not
that's even a thing. [music] Like is
finality a sound? I knew the person to
talk to about this is my good friend
Alex Papadmus because these are the
sorts of things that he's thinking about
too. [music] I actually sent him a text
and it just had 10 albums in it, 10 last
albums and he knew [music]
immediately what the assignment was.
Alex is the senior culture editor at GQ
magazine and he and I were co-workers at
Grantland. Here's my conversation
[music] with Alex.
Alex Papadimus, I've been waiting six
months to say this to you. Welcome to
Cannonball.
>> It is amazing to be here.
>> Uh, all right. So, I want to just think
about our assignment here today. We're
talking about last albums. Like, what
even is a last album? Because I I think
the terminology might be useful to lay
out. Like, what do we mean? Or at least
what do I mean? What do you think I mean
when I say quote last album unquote?
>> Right? Because especially today with the
ability that people have to create I
mean leaving out AI cuz let's leave it
out but like even before that the
technology existed to take sort of
postumous recordings and turn them into
new material. So there's a million Tupac
albums that came out after the quote
unquote last. But let's be I feel like
we should be a little pedantic about
what makes a last album.
>> Yeah, we we should be because otherwise
well there'd be no such thing as a last
album. What? What is lastness at that
point? We're talking about eternity. I
love that you said Tupac cuz I don't
even Does Does he know that he's got a
last album? [laughter]
>> Somebody better tell them,
>> right? So, the person has to have been
alive and sort of the primary creative
force behind the making of this album.
They have to it has to be done while
they are on this earth. It is their
final whatever they worked on final
testament and it's not it is not pieced
together from what they would have done
uh if they had been here. I think that's
probably you know I don't I think we
don't lose too much by sort of imposing
that limit.
>> I mean that's just it for me. It's
period like was the person alive when
the album came out and that to me is the
cut off point. That is that is our those
are the parameters for last album hood
here. I agree. But it they have to have
made this and left it when they left
this world. So once you narrow it down
to that, then you narrow it down to I
mean it's there's basically there's two
kinds. There is the record made by
someone who knows that they are not
going to be here or who suspects that
they are not going to be here or has you
know like is is preparing for that
possibility in the work. And there is
the album by people who just died like
and didn't know they were dying and did
not know that this was going to be
necessarily know that this was going to
be their uh last testament as an artist.
And I think both of those things are
interesting for different reasons,
especially when the sort of unex people
who die unexpectedly
seem to be speaking to that happening in
in whatever way they are. And I think
like these two, you know, it's there's
just kind of there's a bleed between
these two categories.
>> Yeah, they seem like they overlap. And I
might even have a complication to offer
you, but we'll come to that later. What
is the what is the thing that you'd want
to talk about in terms of the last album
in which the artist understands that
this is probably the last one for them.
They've had a long career. They're
dealing with an illness, something, and
this is the last recording that they've
made, and it it it in some way is
correspondent with with their life
circumstances.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think there's something
about just knowing that the career is
done, knowing that this is the that this
is the book end that I think for us as
listeners changes the way that we
experience the entirety of the work and
the entirety of the body of work, right?
Like I I you know, I used to when I was
at Grantland, uh where we both worked, I
was Mark Lanti, who is the culture
editor at Grantland, used to call me Dr.
Death because I wrote a lot of obits. I
really liked writing obits and
>> it wasn't just Mark who said the
[laughter]
>> well you know I mean I didn't go get a
doctorate just to be referred to as Mr.
Death all the time you know it's just
that's it was that's demeaning.
>> You earned it.
>> I yeah I thought a lot a lot about
people who had uh passed away and it was
like when I didn't you know there was
there was kind of always obviously
something to write about. I found it for
some reason really interesting in a way
that I didn't find, you know, cuz when
you write about a living person, you
have to pretend that the best work is
still ahead of them even if they're 80,
you know, like like you have to pretend
that there's still a possibility that
something else will happen. But when
someone's dead, you can actually sort of
look honestly at, you know, their entire
artistic output and it's like, okay,
here's where the peak was. We know where
this happened. Like because there's not
there's there's no other the envelope of
possibility is closed on those things.
And so I really like I, you know, I
don't want to be like I enjoyed when
people died, but like I enjoyed writing
about them after they had died because I
felt like it sort of like contextualized
everything. And it's like now you know
where the book ends and so now you know
where the third act begins or whatever.
Like you know what all that's about. And
the one that I wanted to talk about uh
is an album from 2003 uh called The Wind
by Warren Zevon.
uh Warren Zon emerges uh sort on the
scene um sort of roughly contemporary
with the like the Eagles and Steelely
Dan. He comes out his first album comes
out in 1970. Nobody listens to it. Um
and then he kind of toils in obscurity
for six years as the kind of LA singer
songwriter thing is taking off and he's
sort of a you know he's he's known to
some of those people but he's not
famous. Uh, nothing happens for him
until Linda Ronstat covers his song Poor
Poor Pitiful Me.
[music]
>> After that, he becomes, you know, it's
weird cuz he's sort of for a long time I
would have described him as kind of, you
know, this, you know, almost like he's
an underrated kind of cult singer
songwriter. Uh, he's in the Rock and
Roll Hall of Fame now. Like we were
speaking kind of on the other side of
him finally being sort of recognized.
>> When was he inducted again?
>> This year.
>> Congratulations, Warren.
[applause and cheering]
Thank you for everything
>> this year. Oh my god. Yeah,
>> he just got in. The thing that weirdly
is like his kind of like the high
watermark of his sort of cultural uh you
know of his penetration of the culture
is Werewolves of London. Yes.
>> Uh which gets played on the radio.
>> London.
>> Fantastic song. Uh really like every
Halloween it's on the mix. I mean, it's
funny cuz I can like those chords I can
hear. It's And it's funny. I don't hear
it that often, but when you hear a song
like that when you're a kid. Anyway,
that's a it's a great recorded
performance and musically it just sounds
it sounds wonderful.
>> But it's like a Yeah. So,
>> somebody from Fleetwood Mac is playing
on that.
>> Yeah. He's always he's got the like
heavy friends like you know Jackson
Brown produced the one that like breaks
through uh to the extent that it breaks
through and like Yeah. and he always has
sort of has has had that and that is
also true of the wind which is his his
last album. It's like everybody kind of
comes in for Warren to make this record
with him.
>> They know what do they know? Do they
know he's sick?
>> He's Yeah, he's diagnosed with metheloma
um right after his uh the the previous
album which is called My Rides Here.
[music and singing]
>> Rides here.
Um what's really what's what's
interesting about him is that you know
he's always
>> Yeah. There's [laughter] there's this I
mean he's and look and he's been
thinking about this you know as people
who you know who who use substances
often are like there are he knows that
he's flirting with death and he's been
kind of talking about it his entire
career. You said I [music] believe the
saraphim will gather up my pendo and
carry me away Jim [music]
across the sand of my rides here.
>> Wasn't the previous album before my
rides here called Life Will Kill You or
something like that?
>> Yeah, that's my favorite of the latter
ones from from 2000. And there's
incredible songs on there that are also
him sort of thinking about uh you know
what's going to happen. But like he I
think knew all along that one way or
another he was probably not going to you
know die like you know in his 90s in a
in a old folks home like that he was
going to die somehow through the result
of of his own actions. And so what I
think is interesting about Warren's arc
in terms of
you know reckoning with your own passing
is that yeah like life has a very kind
of it's it is exactly how you would
imagine a Warren Zevon type figure this
very musical musician but then also you
know existed in this kind of seamy
singer songwriter7s
cocaine world so life will kill you is
this very it's very funny it's very
cynical
>> life will kill
and then you'll be dead. Life will
[music] find you
wherever you go.
>> The wind kind of like looks it in the
face and you can see him really
reckoning with something. That's what I
that's what I like about it. That that's
what makes it kind of a a harrowing
experience because he's he he he some of
the jokes kind of fall away.
>> Will [music] you stay with me [singing]
till the end?
when there's nothing [music] but you and
me in [singing] the wind
>> and he's really kind of facing up to
like what this what this reality is and
the idea of
>> not being here and the idea of like oh
what have I what have I wasted what have
I done with my time and like all of that
and yeah it's like as you get through
this like there's there's kind of two
big knocks that this record gives you if
you're thinking about somebody dying
like you can you start listening to to
it. First two songs, you know, Dirty
Life and Times and Disorder in the House
are very much in the Warren spirit. It's
like I am a I'm a mess. I've created
chaos around me. Uh, you know, all of
these things. It's like he's reckoning
with like, you know, his kind of
literally dirty life and times his
history like as a you know, and then he
covers Knocking on Heaven's Door. It's
getting dark. Too dark [music] to see
[music]
>> and I feel [singing]
knocking on heaven's door.
>> Bob Dylan's
>> Bob Dylan's famously covered
on Heaven's Door.
>> And you should I feel like it's okay.
You should be dying if you're going to
sing that song.
>> [clears throat]
>> If you're not Bob Dylan, you should be
dying or you should have some knowledge
that you are going out. There are very
beautiful versions of that song by Jerry
Garcia. And it is, I think, informed
also by Jerry's understanding that he's
not going to be here very long. Like
that he, you know, this is someone who
was also a drug user and also kind of
like, you know, knew that he was there,
you know, his number was going to come
up. But this version of Knocking on
Heaven's Door, I have to say, he just
sounds like he knows what he's singing.
>> Yeah.
>> And there's something about the like
that backing vocal that like is with him
as he's sort of thinking through what it
means to sing
this song.
>> My understanding is that this was a hard
one to make for the reason of he was
dying and he was back on the on the
sausage. And so you feel that that
difficulty, but yeah, that sense of like
the backing vocal almost kind of holding
him up in a way.
>> Yeah. That's exactly what I was
thinking.
>> He's leaning on these voices. Yeah. To
do it. And then it lands on pretty much
the greatest I would say last song on a
last album
by anyone from at least this millu. Like
if you're going to go, it's the perfect
way. Like if you're leaving the stage, I
would pretty much give it to the song
Keep Me in Your Heart.
[singing]
>> In your heart for a while.
I love how he's recorded on this album.
like he sounds like a lot of these last
albums to me are remarkable for how
close to the microphone and how alone in
the studio his vocal is recorded.
>> Yeah. I mean, what's a vocal, right?
It's breath. It's literally like you are
listening to like the last exhalations
that these people will make on on the
planet. And it's it's it's such a
>> And at least the way that we know them,
right?
>> Yeah. as as singers,
>> it'll stop you. It will it'll take you
down um if from whatever you're doing
because it's him asking,
you know, uh maybe a lover, maybe a
friend, probably all of the above.
>> Just uh think about old Warren for a
little while after I'm gone. If it
occurs to you, just give me give a
thought here and there. And like he
wants to exist still in some very small
way in someone's life. And uh you know
it's always I I I'm getting choked up
just thinking about it cuz it is very
much it's the way that it is very true
to the way that people who've died live
in your in your existence where you're
suddenly like oh yeah I remember that
that he would have loved that you know
like just that weird sort of those
little moments where it's like oh god
yeah I can't call this guy to be like
can you believe that you know [music]
>> hold me in your thoughts
take me [singing] to your dreams
touch me as I fall into [music]
So this is this is the kind of album
where
the meaning of it is
you know what you're listening to as
you're listening to it. It's not a
secret. Um and other albums that sort of
operate this way I would say I mean what
would you include? I would include David
Bowy's Blackar.
>> Yeah.
>> And we could add Leonard Cohen and
Johnny Cash to that category. Then
there's this other category that's like
the 1B of knowing. You kind of mentioned
it as going under this umbrella, but I
would like to like create a new umbrella
out of this one. And this is the one
that is the this is the premonition
album. This is the
>> the like I don't know. I'm not sick.
Nothing's going on with me, but I've
lived a life. I probably could die at
some point. Um, this is that album like
like it's not a I'm I've got a I've got
a terminal illness. This is just like
I've got a feeling I suspect.
And I think the the greatest example of
this for a variety of reasons is is
maybe
Notorious B.I.'s second album, Life
After Death, which came out in 1997, I
think 16 days after he died. I mean, the
album was done before he left this
earth. And I should also say, I don't
love this album. It's not great. It's
not a great album. Ready to die, the
album before this, the first Big E
album.
>> Ready to die.
>> Masterpiece. Masterpiece. One of the
greatest albums of all time. This one
suffers from a lot of things. One is
generosity. There are too many people on
this record. Biggie isn't an
afterthought, but he is this is this has
some of his some very good Biggie
performances on it, but it also has some
very good performances by a lot of other
people.
>> Yeah. Um, but anyway, I I think that
this is this to me,
what is this doing for you in terms of
of of how it is communicating a sense of
both like living with the possibility of
dying?
>> I mean, this one is interesting, right?
cuz it's not it it is it is someone who
is you know if you are an artist like
Biggie whose work has been suffused with
the possibility with the with the idea
basic starting with like you know I'm
not even supposed to be here like I
should not even have gotten to make
ready to die
>> like by you know sort of like
actuarially you know sort of like
whatever it is spiritually like I was
probably I you know I I probably should
have not made it to this point and
there's So much of the, you know, the
the kind of the iconic Biggie songs are
about that, you know, that feeling like
of of like, you know, we like we made
it. [music]
>> Like we made it to the other side. We're
rich now. We made it out of the hood.
Like whatever that sort that archetypal
journey, but then also Ready to Die ends
with him shooting himself. [music]
>> I swear to God.
It's like it ends with a like it's like
he's like there's a very dark
>> you know kind of turn to that where it's
like this always contained within this
success is the possibility of of doom
and like the likelihood of doom and that
there's like sort of that that's almost
in the nature of fame and you know it's
like there's that song at the end
towards the end of this one you're
nobody till somebody kills you. So, it's
it's like, you know, if you are an
artist who talks about their own death
all the time and the possibility of
their own death and of their own violent
death, you are the broken clock. Uh
that's right twice a day, you know, like
it's it's kind of like you're you've
basically sort of you know, you're going
to be right eventually, you know, and
it's like it is a it's it's partly like
a rock and roll kind of like
self- mythologizing thing to be like
people are trying to kill me and like
one of these days they're going to
succeed. And it's just it's kind of it
just in that sense it like goes back to
the blues, right? You know, that like
we're all we're not going to live long.
um that that notion that's sort of like
worked into all of this music.
>> And there's I mean from the standpoint
of making music during Jim Crow, that is
a very
>> likely outcome of of life in this
country for for black people, but
especially to to to be an artist who is
>> building your artistry around these
questions of I would describe it as
forced mortality,
>> right?
>> Um
>> gun culture. you're in a sort of gun
world in some way like you know you have
these you have people around you who are
doing involved with this stuff like you
kind of know you know that's a
possibility it's an in like I said it's
like an informed guess at that thing
>> right and then comes his last album life
after death and it's it's two discs and
I think that the two discs are really
important at least to me in terms of how
I think about this as a as a last album
I feel like the first disc is it's the
disc where he's like, I'll probably I'll
probably die after these songs.
Something's going to happen to me. I
don't know what it's going to be. I
would love to listen to something from
that first disc like Kicking the Door,
>> which just sounds like a million dollars
cuz DJ Premiere did it. kick in the
door, waving the four four you [music]
papa, don't hit me no more.
>> But it is also the one where he's sort
of thinking about, you know, the life
that he has lived and the toll that it
will take. And it's just like the the
violence of it
>> when I wet. [music] Look how dark you
get when you should breath or should I
let you die? But then you get to disc
two and that to me is the
kind of revelation here, which is that
there's a whole other life for this
person to wait what I'm still here. I
still get to make more music.
>> Yeah.
>> This two is where the adventure really
begins. in this category of of last
album really kind of starts to break
your heart a little bit because you're
just you can hear this person be like
wait I just get to keep doing this maybe
okay well what what can I do and the
thing that he can do is is the song my
one of my favorite songs in this album
is is just from the standpoint of sound
is another which is him and little him
sniping at each other.
>> [__] you.
>> [__] you, too. [music]
>> [__] you, [__]
>> But let's just listen to how hard this
beat hits.
>> And [music] I mean, every time it comes
on, I don't know what to do. Am I like
listening to these two? Like, diss
[clears throat] the [__] out of each
other or am I am I like am I dropping it
low? And the answer is
>> both.
>> I'm probably doing both. [music]
True.
[music]
>> But I would say that this album has this
tension between
>> like which which of the roads do I want
to go down?
>> It's all in there. Yeah.
>> I'm not dead yet. The world is my
oyster.
>> [laughter]
>> like the the what's going on on this
record as much as it is sort of you know
you can't think about it without
thinking about his death and you can't
and it's contextualized by death but it
has so much life in it has so much
creative life and so much kind of like
just ornery life and like that it's you
know it's [laughter] brought in
>> the king of sex rap I mean
>> nobody wrote better sex songs
>> but then you also have the things that
become you do have the things that in in
manner of the sort of I didn't know I
was going to die album. The things that
become kind of inadvertently tragic and
I mean I would go with sky's the limit
for the ultimate version of that which
is you know this song about
>> we made it from only moves when your
heart's [music] in it and live the
limit. This is a person who, as far as
I'm concerned, was really ready to like
go to Bangerville. [laughter]
Like, I don't know what the future would
have held for him and Puffy as as
musical collaborators. It seemed to me
like Biggie was really curious about all
the other ways he could sound. And the
the sad part to me is
you can hear him getting these tastes
and and maybe wanting more.
>> I think that's what's interesting about
listening to this. It's like, oh, he
would have done who knows what he would
have done like and would he would he
kind of, you know, would he have been
Jay-Z instead of Jay-Z? Like would he
have been that guy who sort of goes on
to make like six or seven giant albums
and sort of explores like different
avenues of his own way talking about his
life in different terms and like talking
about like each of the the stages of
life you know like what sort of that
vacuum sort of was filled by other
people in the '9s and beyond.
>> Okay. So, I want to stay in this world
of like what if gone too soon, cut
short, and just think about like what it
sounds like to lose an artist who just
wasn't even thinking like death wasn't
even on their mind, but something
terrible happened and this this is the
last record that we have of this person
being the artist they were. And I think
a very
clean
terrible for example of that is
Aaliyah's self-titled third and final
album from 2001. And it is just uh talk
about going to Bangerville [laughter]
for sure. I mean that's there's
obviously I mean this is the this is the
third category. It's people who just
were living their life and making their
albums and like sort of thinking that
this is going to be, you know, part of
probably assuming this was going to be
part of a long career. And so there's
there's no attempt to reckon with that
possibility except in the sense of like
I, you know, just like in the sense of
purely like anybody who like makes a
mark is saying I'm putting something
down for when I'm not here anymore. So
like everything you do is that in some
ways like you are sort of always
contributing to the postumous
understanding of your work by doing any
work. But these songs are not about
death.
>> You're not thinking about death when
you're listening to rock the boat.
>> No, you were thinking about like making
more life. And I just sort of I just
really
I don't know. There's just such a
there's such a wonderful
um sensualization of herself here where
like it's coming from her as opposed to
like a production,
>> right? Well, she was some Yeah, she was
someone who was always very much you
know there like that's that's the the
you know aside from the you know her
accidental death like a c you know
tragic death like the tragedy of Aaliyah
is the degree to which she was sort of
under the thumb of various producers and
kind of Svengali like people obviously
R. Kelly being the most sort of like
odious example like you know who
produced her first album and they were
also wed uh for a while and that you
know it's a very sort of strange dark
history there but this one is where
she's starting she's beginning to come
into her own and it's like and I you
know I sort like she missed all the
events of the 2000s but I think she she
missed like a sort of the you know a
climate in which she could have maybe
taken more control of her work and in
which people would have wanted to hear
that.
>> I mean, I just think about that album
cover like she's just in a tank top and
her hair is no longer hiding her face,
right? She is very visible as as a
person like not obscured. She kept that
hair over her. I mean that the hair was
a was a was a eye patch basically. And
that album cover, the the the Aaliyah
album cover,
all the possibility is in that. This is
a a person who is open like her posture
here is I'm ready. I'm ready for
whatever the world is trying to offer
me. I'm ready to take some stuff cuz
also her singing got really beautiful. I
mean, like even more beautiful on this
album.
>> Yeah. I mean, it's the great kind of
what if for uh Missy and Timoland as as
producers as well. Like if this if this
person had continued to make records
with them, what would they have done
together? And I think that's really the
you know, [snorts]
with Biggie too, it's like this the same
thing. It's like what would what we are
mourning is possibility in the future
and the things that would have happened.
We're mourning the things we will not
get in a way that we're not with with a
David Bowie or like you know, somebody
like that. It's like this person would
have not lived that much longer. They
probably would have still made more
records. But it's like with this it's
the discoraphy that we were robbed of
and like you know it we didn't get
enough.
>> I think we should just sit in what
possibility sounded like. This is uh we
should listen to More Than a Woman. Um
which every time I see it I'm like oh
there's also uh the BeeGees
>> Woman.
Anyway, more than a woman.
>> I mean, the the the sort of orchestral
and the slink.
>> Yeah. [music] Just knowing how to
inhabit these kind of busy tracks with
all these weird blurps and sounds kind
of popping popping out at you.
>> It's hard to do. I love this. I love
this song. Oh man, it just [laughter]
it's a killer.
>> Yeah. But I mean, so I think that this
category of album is interesting because
it also has the possibility of being
starter for a whole universe of music
that that happens in its wake. Aaliyah
by Aaliyah being a being a last album,
right? It's her last album, but it also
feels like it's the beginning of
something or near the beginning of
something, which is, you know, I don't
know. Do we have Sierra without Aaliyah?
Do we have FKA twigs without Aaliyah?
There's just like a whole class of
setting aside what Timberland and Missy
would go on to do. Like the the kind of
singer that I think she would have
evolved
beyond in some way.
>> Yeah. No, she'd be she'd she'd be
working with Tam Pala or something like
she would be in that zone. It's like
that's
>> Rihanna wound up there a little bit too.
>> Yeah. Yeah. For sure. For sure. They
like and just literally singing on a on
the track like just kind of like that's
I want it I want that exact track. She
just like used to sang over the
instrument instrumental like but yeah
it's like those those you know she would
have gone we that this is what it is
about like the theostumous thing. We
don't know what choices she would have
made
later. So we only have people kind of
like operating in you know with based on
what she could you know do to this point
which is a you know fairly obvious point
I guess. No, but it's worth it's worth
saying.
>> Yeah,
>> because you know, one of the things that
we're talking about here is the
inarguability
of a last album. It kind of makes me
want to talk about Black Messiah a
little bit because I feel like Black
Messiah is a really great thing to think
through because it is
it is a lot of things, right? in terms
of the way we've been like trying to
taxonomize
what a last album is.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, you know, they are talking about
there being a fourth D'Angelo album that
he had been working on, you know, in
these last years of his life, but for
our purposes today, Black Messiah is the
last album. And, you know, I don't think
he had any idea he was going to die at
51 when he released this thing when it
came out in 2014. No, I mean I think he
was probably further away from that
feeling than he'd been in a while
because I think he had sort of this was
someone who had struggled with
addiction. He had a car wreck that you
know he survived and it was only after
all of that like I guess the the making
of Black Messiah is what it's like 2007
I think is like you know around there
and then he's making it for like seven
years uh on and off.
>> There were 14 years between Voodoo which
came out in 2000 and the release of
Black Messiah. And I feel like that's
one of the things that I always think
about when I listen to it is like, oh,
this sounds like somebody who I don't
know, maybe these were like done at the
end or something like, you know, but
like there's all these layers to it and
it's he's like
>> he's there's a palest.
>> There's like he's piling layer upon
layer of vocals and guitars and all of
that. And you know, like so that's part
of it is like, you know, he's been
working on this. So, it's it's both a
last album and a comeback album because
there basically everything is a comeback
album for him,
>> right? I mean, I think that the the
reason I love this album as a last album
as as
like heartbreaking as it is to to like
accept that that is true is that it is
doing all of the last album work that
you and I are talking about, right? This
is a person who should have had a fourth
album. This is a person who
is sort of thinking through what it
means to possibly die, but also knowing
in the most existential like, you know,
cradle to grave sort of way that he's
going to die eventually and and what
would it mean if it if it happened
tomorrow? What if this is the thing that
stands as the last thing I do?
>> Right? It's asking something bigger of
yourself. if you are looking at your
whole legacy and looking at your whole
life when you you know you turn to you
know to do these things. But I mean,
this is my point too about the back read
that we do when somebody has died is
like now we're hearing this like is this
here or are we just cuz like I'm like
now now I'm like oh yeah of course like
it's sort of a it's called black messiah
but like that a messiah has to die like
that's sort of that's what happens like
you go you know so you're not really the
messiah until you're killed on some
level
>> and just to like parenthetically just to
interrupt you for one second I mean is
he was a like a thinking through Jay
Edgar Hoover's you paranoid suspicion
that there was a black messiah of the
streets who was going to ferment
revolution for black people in this
country. Um, and therefore like someone
like Fred Hampton and the other black
nationalists from that period needed to
be taken out.
>> Yeah. And do you see, you know, and it's
like, is it his death that causes us to
see this or but I do I do kind of feel
like he has some of the sort of the the
the certainty that you see in people who
kind of knew they were going to be
martyed and like of course he didn't he
wasn't martyed. you passed away D'Angelo
but like that feeling of
I have done I know that what like when
it's my time I will have done the thing
that I was meant uh to do and I was
doing the thing that I was meant to do
and like I was sort of like I I I was I
was exactly where where God wanted me uh
from moment to moment and I knew God was
working through me
>> Alex that's it right he was ready I mean
because think about the way this works
versus something like voodoo right
voodoo is a great album as an album and
is a great second album in a lot of
ways, right? It is promising that
something something is going to happen
even if it takes me, you know, 14 years
to tell you what it is. Uh something is
brewing in me and I am I am undergoing a
change,
>> right?
>> And Black Messiah to me is the change,
right? Is the thing he underwent. I
think part of it for me is
that we are surrounded by death all the
time. I think that there's a real human
curiosity
to experience or to hear other people
think through what it is going to mean
to not be here anymore. And so for me, I
think there's a real legitimacy in
thinking about, you know, albums as just
one zone in which that
um relaying of an experience is
happening. Um
and when you can hear a person accepting
that this is out there or also just
understanding it in D'Angelo's case how
mortality functions, I don't know. I
feel like what we're talking about is
the meaning that we're giving something
because
the fact of it corresponds with
questions that we as human beings have
about what it means to be here. And
these albums in some way are a are a
guide like an index
um of having lived.
>> Maybe it's like all of our time is
limited, right? And so you have to think
about your time as limited. And if you
think about your time as limited, then
that's going to contextualize things. If
you don't pretend that you have nothing
but time, you're going to make different
choices and it's going to frame it's
like it, you know, it's a weird thing.
It's it's like we think of it as morbid
to think about your own death all the
time, but like if you think about your
death all the time, you're going to be
like, sh is this worth these are some of
my last hours on Earth. Like it's the
the the sand is going one direction
through the hourglass.
>> Yeah. I
>> what am I going to do and what am I not
going to do?
So, and so in D'Angelo's case, it's like
I'm not going to I'm not going to do
crunches and come out with Voodoo 2, you
know, and like make a workout tape or
something like I'm going to go into my,
you know, zone and like kind of try to
create something that can stand next to
the sort of the work that has inspired
me and motivated me like while I have
the chance. And I think that that's just
it might be the difference between
I don't know just a certain kind of
person and a certain kind of artist like
just has that thing and maybe that is
why they are motivated to
leave a mark while they can and is that
they know that they're not they have
some sense that they're like yeah this
is I'm here for a good time not a long
time like I'm going to there's I have a
limited amount of space in which to do
what I'm going to do. It gets to the
essence of
art, which is like, you know, it's this.
It's like going back to like cave
paintings. It's like I'm going to put my
handprint on the wall so that you'll
know that like I existed when and I
don't even you know those guys who did
that those people those ancient people
may have not even thought about it in
those terms but that's the sort of
that's you know it's the romance that we
attach to it is that somebody's like I
was here
>> Alex thanks for talking about last
albums with me [laughter]
>> there's no way say that I would rather
[music] spend some of my last hours cuz
they're all our last hours. We don't
know.
>> God,
>> it's I know. See, now it's now it's
heavy. Now it's heavy. I made it heavy.
>> I receive it. I receive it and I'm I I
send it back to you.
>> [music]